---
layout: project
title: MAE 4300 Ethical Analysis Project
description: Boeing 737 Max Ethical Case Study
technologies: [No software tools involved.]
image: /assets/images/ethics-study.jpg
---

The Boeing 737 Max passenger aircraft was developed during the 2010s to be the fourth generation model of the Boeing 737. The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) certified the aircraft in March of 2017, and it was first used in commercial flights later that year. Within the next two years, the aircraft was involved in two deadly crashes that claimed the lives of 346 people: Lion Air Flight 610 in October 2018, and Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 in March 2019. The aircraft was allowed to continue operation after the first crash, but it was grounded from March 2019 to December 2020 following the second one.

Both crashes were ultimately attributed to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS). Due to the engines being larger and mounted further forward than on previous generations, the 737 Max had an instability where the nose of the aircraft would be pushed upward when the angle of attack was high. The MCAS system was built to compensate for this by automatically adjusting the elevators to lower the nose whenever a high angle of attack was detected. Each 737 Max had two angle of attack sensors, but MCAS only used data from one sensor at a time – in both crashes, there was evidence of failure in the angle of attack sensors. Both crashes occurred within ten minutes of takeoff, due to MCAS pushing the noses of the planes downward.

The FAA has a program called Organization Designation Authorization (ODA), which allows certain employees within organizations to perform FAA certification tasks within their organizations. In Boeing’s case, key certifications for the 737 Max were issued by Boeing employees instead of FAA regulators.

Later investigations revealed that the FAA was not informed that MCAS would be implemented during takeoff and landing, and internal communications from Boeing revealed that it was strongly incentivized to keep changes minimal so that the planes would not have to be tested as extensively, and so pilots would not be required to retrain on the new aircraft. Also, internal reports have since shared that Boeing’s workplace culture as a whole was structured to encourage projects to be completed as quickly and as cheaply as possible, and there is strong evidence (specifically from reports from Mark Forkner, the Boeing 737 Max Chief Technical Pilot) that issues with MCAS implementation were reported internally but not escalated.  

In my analysis, I will focus on the following ethical questions:
1.	Should the FAA have allowed Boeing employees to issue certifications for the 737 Max through ODA?
2.	Should the FAA have grounded the 737 Max following the crash of Lion Air Flight 610?
3.	Should Boeing have tried to avoid making changes that would cause more extensive testing and pilot training?
4.	Should the Boeing employees who knew about the issues with MCAS have escalated them?
5.	Should the Boeing engineers have implemented MCAS to rely on data from multiple angle of attack sensors?

The FAA had an ethical obligation to ensure all aircraft under their jurisdiction, incluidng the 737 Max designed by Boeing, operated in a manner that maximized public safety. There are potentially some non-critical checks that companies could safely self-regulate using ODAs or a similar delegation of ressponsibility, but the FAA abdicated their ethical responsibility by allowing Boeing to self-certify key safety systems. They did not provide enough oversight to ensure the 737 Max was safe to operate, but they certified the aircraft anyway. If they had not delecated regulation and they had not abdicated their responsibility to enforce regulatory standards, the FAA could have caught the MCAS issue before the 737 Max ever flew. It is important to note that anti-regulatory lobbying and underfunding both severely inhibit the FAA’s ability to enforce regulatory standards, but for something as high-risk as certifying a new aircraft, the FAA did not properly fulfill their obligations as a regulatory agency.

The deadly crash of Lion Air Flight 610 was evidence of a potential significant risk to public welfare should the 737 Max be permitted to continue operating. It is important to note that groudning the plane would hurt Boeing financially, and that if the crash were truly entirely pilot error as opposed to any failure of the Boeing aircraft, then grounding the 737 Max could be needlessly harmful. However, given the rarity and significance of plane crashes, being found at fault for a plane crash is highly reputationally (and ultimately, financially) damaging to any company - it is safe to assume that grounding the 737 Max would have left Boeing better off than allowing it to fly and crash again. The long-term solution here would be for the FAA to always ground planes after crashes if there’s any evidence it might be an aircraft issue, but to have efficient systems in place to determine their fitness to fly so they can be ungrounded as quickly as possible. This approach would both maximize public safety and minimize harm to the companies.

There is no inherent ethical problem in Boeing avoiding changes to minimize more extensive testing and training. However, their ethical failure was in their lack of transparency around the changes they did make. If producing the Max as quickly and cheaply as possible was a strong motivator for Boeing, they could have acted on that by not making the changes to the engines that caused them to need to implement MCAS during takeoff. The fact that Boeing was able to make significant changes to their critical flight systems shows a significant lack of thoroughness in regulatory standards and regulatory enforcement, and introducing stricter standards on testing and retraining when critical flight systems are changed could help prevent future issues in this regard.

The Boeing engineers who knew about the safety issues with MCAS implementation during takeoff and landing should have done more to escalate these safety concerns. The engineers should not have complete culpability for this, as there were many issues with the Boeing workplace culture that would disincentivize them from doing this. However, based on the ASME Code of Ethics for Engineers, the engineers at Boeing have a far greater ethical responsibility to maximize the safety and welfare of the public than to act in the best interests of their company. These engineers were placed under intense organizational pressure not to raise these safety concerns, and there are systemic changes that could be made to remove barriers to reporting. For example, it could be beneficial to ntroduce reporting channels to regulatory agencies that do not require employees to push complaints through their own companies.

The Boeing engineers who implemented MCAS on the 737 Max absolutely should have set it up to rely on data from multiple angle of attack sensors to remove the single point of failure. The engineers have fuller culpability on this, since it would theoretically be a fairly quick solution to implement, meaning there should be less organizational pressure for them not to. Furthermore, there should be strong regulatory standards on avoiding single points of failure in critical safety systems on aircraft. The engineers involved still had an ethical obligation to remove single points of failure even when it wasn’t expressly required by regulatory standards, but strong regulatory standards should exist to support engineers in fulfilling their ethical responsibilities in designing technology that maximizes public safety.
